# Appendix A- Using the Linux Shell

## The Basic Commands

[TODO] : add detail to each command

- man
- pwd
- ls
- cd
- mv
- rm
- touch
- cp & rsync
- mkdir & rmdir
- cat
- date
- chmod & chown
- less & more
- ln
- du & df
- clear (only use in scripts)
- passwd
- sudo & su
- head & tail
- tee
- grep, sed, awk, tr
- w
- tar, gzip, bzip, zip
- ssh , scp, ftp
- diff
- sort
- uniq
- export
- systemctl
- ip, ping, & dig
- ps
- free
- top
- kill
- whereis
- wget

## Tab Completion and faster navigation

    Probably the most useful shortcut for using the shell is tab completion. This is used when you need to type a really long command or chain of commands, say I want to run ncmpcpp, a name that is both long and hard to remember, instead of just typing the full name I can type ```ncm``` and press tab, and ta-da suddenly the full name is inserted. If you happen to have another package that has multiple possible endings say you want to run ``lstopo`` but you have `ls, lsusb, lstopo` all on your system, most shells will display a menu underneath with all the possible options. This is nice for commands, but the true power comes in file names, say I want to run ``cat /etc/pacman.d/mirrorlist`` while that's not too awful to type out, you could easily type `cat /e` press tab, get `cat /etc/` add pac to get `cat /etc/pac` press tab, get `cat /etc/pacman.d/` type mir and tab and get the full command, while that sounds complicated it actually speeds using the command line up rather significantly and prevents spelling mistakes

    Next up for navigation is directory shortcuts, these can be massive time savers, the most obvious is `~` which is just short hand for the location of the current shell users home directory, so in my case `~` is the exact same as typing out `/home/vega`. The next two have already been touched on which are `.` for the current directory and `..` for the previous directory. Depending on the shell and arbitrary number of dots may take you back and arbitary number of directories. Give it a shot! If nothing else you can always use `../../..` to navigate back as necessary. Finally, `-` represents the last directory you were in so if your in `~/Downloads` and then `cd /etc/pacman.d/`, running `cd -` will bring you back to downloads.

    The most advanced form of bult in linux navigation comes in the form of `pushd` and `popd`, which as their names imply push and pop directories to a stack (a special kind of list) of directories. Like a stack of any item you can put or 'push' an item on top, and take or 'pop' an item off. Running `dirs -v` will show you a numberd list of the stack, you can navigate to the top item with `popd` or and abitrary item with `cd ~#` where # is the number as shown by `dirs -v`.

    Finally, there's one more super handy way to get around your file system but it's a non-standard tool so most systems or servers you use other than your own will not have it installed, and that's autojump. Put simply it takes a good guess about where you want to go by only typing part of the name of a folder you've navigated to before, so say you have a long file path `/mnt/data/archived/january2000/pictures/family/vacation/` you can get back to it again by simply running `j vac` which is obviously much simpiler. It works the vast majority of the time in practice, only having issues if you don't include enough letters leading to ambuguity.

## I/O redirection

for the hard core, you can read good documentation here: https://www.tldp.org/LDP/abs/html/io-redirection.html

* stdin (<) (<<)

[TODO]

* stdout (>) (>>)

[TODO]

* stderr (2>) (2>>)

[TODO]

Note, `&>` redirects both stderr and stdout

* pipes ( | )

Finally, the weirdest and rarely used `<>` operator can be used to directly attch file descriptions and read/write files dirctly, this is rearely used as it's kind of a pita, but if you need to script something advanced it's available. Stollen from the above advanced link:

>    [j]<>filename
>
>       #  Open file "filename" for reading and writing,
>       #+ and assign file descriptor "j" to it.
>       #  If "filename" does not exist, create it.
>       #  If file descriptor "j" is not specified, default to fd 0, stdin.
>       #
>       #  An application of this is writing at a specified place in a file.
>       echo 1234567890 > File    # Write string to "File".
>       exec 3<> File             # Open "File" and assign fd 3 to it.
>       read -n 4 <&3             # Read only 4 characters.
>       echo -n . >&3             # Write a decimal point there.
>       exec 3>&-                 # Close fd 3.
>       cat File                  # ==> 1234.67890
>       #  Random access, by golly.

## Wild Cards & Regex

Regular Expressions or 'Regex' are an incredibly powerful tool used to match strings in a logical way. For example, say you wanted to find all the phone numbers on page that started with the area code 555, the next three digits were any number, and the last four digits could be represented as either numbers or letters, and '-' separating each group. With regex that's easy, the regular expression for this looks like:

```5{3}-[0-9]{3}-[a-zA-Z0-9]{4}```

Which while I could explain, I think just staring at that a little while should make it obvious and ideally the mental effort will lead to a better understanding. Regex can do a lot more than this though. Go ahead and checkout https://regex101.com and give it a shot.

regex can be used with a bunch of common tools like awk, sed, and grep. This means you can do fancy things like chain ls and grep together with a pipe to find any file matching a pattern or chain commands to rename any file containing characters which may be invalid in NTFS ( The file system used by Windows) to be valid before doing a transfer.

## Job Control

[TODO]

* fg

* bg

* jobs

* & operator

* Ctrl+z

* Ctrl+c / +d

## Shortcuts

- ctrl-z to bg process, fg to resume
- jobs -l or ps -a to see jobs
- reptyr to move
- pushd/popd & dirs to use path stack
- cd - to last dir
- history, and !№ to run that cmd
- ctrl-c/d to kill
- ctrl-l to clearscrn
- ctrl-u to clrline
- ctrl-r to search hist
- ctrl-left/right to nav args
- expansion with mv /path/meh.{md,txt}

## Aliases and customization

[TODO]

## Shell Scripting

[TODO]

## Alternative Shells

When we installed arch we actually changed the default shell from bash to zsh, but there are other options such as fish, csh, and xonsh among others

[TODO]

## Alternative commands

* bat
  * alternative to `cat`, capable of syntax highlighting and line numbering
* exa, lsd
  * alternatives to `ls`, eaiser on the eyes
  * You could also use `ranger` or `nnn` two fully featured terminal file browsers
* fd
  * altertnative to `find`, doesn't suck
* htop, gtop
  * alternatives to `top`, doesn't suck
* prettyping
  * alternative to `ping`, pretty
* diff-so-fancy, icdiff
  * alternative to `diff`, but fancy
* ncdu
  * while much slower than `du` it's great for finding out what's eating storage space

## Useful Non-Stock CLI Tools

* tldr
  * tldr, 'for too long didn't read' provides a quick, easy to read version of the man page for many common linux commands. Forget how to use `tar` ? just run `tldr tar`
* autojump
  * refrence above description in faster navigation
* mpd + ncmpcpp
  * 'music player daemon' and 'ncurses music player client plus plus' are two cli tools that work in tandem to provide an experiance that I presonally find superiour to any graphical music player
* irssi
  * full featured IRC client, chat right from your terminal
* screenfetch
  * get some nift stats about your terminal, add to your shell's RC file to be one of the cool kids
* [moreutils](https://joeyh.name/code/moreutils/)
  * "moreutils is a growing collection of the unix tools that nobody thought to write long ago when unix was young."
* [hr](https://github.com/octobanana/hr)
  * Need some way to visually seperate things, this literally just makes a horizontal line in the terminal
* [fltrdr](https://github.com/octobanana/fltrdr)
  * Wanna read at 1000wpm, this is the tool for you.
* [crex]( https://github.com/octobanana/crex)
  * test regular expressions in the terminal
* lynx, w3m, browsh
  * Browse the web from a terminal (not a joke and actually useful)
* entr
  * monitor file system for changes
* noti
  * send a graphical system notification when a command finishes
* progress
  * start a command and have no way to see what its doing (rsync, cp, etc)? This is your tool
* figlet, toilet, banner
  * makes big text, run `figlet Your Text Here` and see your text in big, ascii letters
* no more secrets
  * reveal text in a martix effect.. I'm streching the meaning of useful here
* stress-ng
  * stresstest your system in pretty much any super specific way you can think of, or hammer your cpu to test an overclock
* pandoc
  * convert between damn near any text format to any other format
* taskwarrior
  * keep track of To-Do's and tasks, can also be paired with timewarrior for timetracking
* waifu2x (many forks available)
  * Upscale and de-noise images zoom-and-enhance style but for real-    this ones' a bit GPU intensive because it uses AI
* youtube-dl
  * despite the name this tool can download videos or audio from almost any page on the internet, even supporting playlists in many cases too.
* [rat](https://github.com/ericfreese/rat)
  * "Compose shell commands to build terminal applications"
* magic-wormhole
  * tool for getting a file between two systems easily and secure, just run `wormhole send` and `wormhole recive` on the respective systems
* Ix, Gist
  * Paste tools, like pastebin
* DMIDecode
  * get info from BIOS
* hexyl
  * pretty terminal based hex viewer
* [UXY](https://github.com/sustrik/uxy)
  * "UXY tool also wraps some common UNIX tools and exports their output in UXY format."

    "UXY is a tool to manipulate UXY format, which is a basically a two-dimenstional table that's both human- and machine-readable."

    This gives a nice format for manipulation of commands though pipes for super complex shell scripting
* lsof
  * list what files a runnig process has open

While some of these may be included, they're some of the OG addons or tools to make included things better:

* tmux

  * multiplex your termianal, open multiple terminals in your terminal, usefull in non-graphicas ttys espically

* vim + extensions (neovim, spacevim, etc)

  * the old school text editor meets new school

* GDB + gef

  * GDB, the original debugger, has it's faults. GEF, a config file for GDB on steroids, fixes many of them. While orgiginally made for exploit developers, many people use it for everyday debugging

## Common Graphical Linux Utils

[TODO]

Mostly taken from https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/List_of_applications and https://github.com/Kickball/awesome-selfhosted

## Graphical Enviroments++

Gnome, KDE, Pantheon,

Rofi, Polybar, j4,

Compton

Nitrogen, pywal, (feh),

## Free Graphical Utilities

### Office & Daily

Libreoffice, Xournal++,

thunar + bulk rename, nautilus, Filezilla, Deluge, qBitTorrent,

Firefox, Min, Vivalidi,

Marktext, Typora, Notable

Geogebra

Evolution

Evince

### A/V

Feh, Nomacs

Rawtherepee, Krita, Gimp, Darktable

Inkscape,

Blender, Pencil2D, OpenToonz

Goxel,

Pithos, Gnome-Music,

Cadence (jack2)

Audacity, Ardour, LMMS, non, Radium

Giada

VCV Rack

Guitarix

PureData, SonicPi, ORCA

Processing, VVVV,

VLC

DaVinci Resolve

Cheese, Motion, OBS

### Social

Thunderbird

LBRY

Discord, Telegram, qTox, HexChat, SRain, Riot/Fractal ,

### Programming

Okteta

Gitkraken

Code, Atom, Sublime, Code::Blocks, Eclipse, Netbeans, IntelliJ, Sublime

PyCharm, Spyder

Cutter, Node-Red

Etherape/cap, Wireshark

### Engineering

FreeCAD, LibreCAD, KiCad, CircuitSim, Fritzing

PulseView, Arduino, PlatformIO

### System

Alacritty, urxvt, Deepin-Terminal, Hyper,

Baobab, Filelight, GParted, VeraCrypt

Syncthing

Etcher

lsusb, lshw, lstopo, usbview,

Firewall frontend?

ClamAV

deepin-screesshot, scrot

### IRL

Gnome-Maps

Gnome-Weather

Celestia

Stellarium

### Other

GnuRadio, SDRAngel

## Paid Graphical Utilities

Renoise, Bitwig

## Self hosted / Services

Netdata

VPN (Wiregaurd)

Snort, Suritica

Gitea, Gitlab

Mathics

LAMP stack

Couchpotato, headphones

mpd, ampache

Owncloud, NextClound

Samba

DAT, IPFS

Convos.by

Ix , 0bin (pastebin)

Mathics

TaskWeb (TaskWarrior)